DESIGN.md, before:

# Bioreactor Control System: Technical Design

**Version:** 1.0  
**Status:** DRAFT  
**Audience:** Engineering Team (Frontend, Backend, Firmware)

## 1. Guiding Principles & Core Philosophy

This document outlines the technical design for a web-based, ISA-88 compliant PLC interface. Our success hinges on one core principle: the strict **separation of the procedural recipe from the equipment control logic**.

-   **The Recipe (The "What")**: Defines the process strategy. This logic lives on the server and is created by users in our web UI. It contains **no** hardware-specific code.
-   **Equipment Control (The "How")**: The basic actions the hardware can perform (e.g., heat, agitate). This logic is implemented once in the firmware and is reused across all recipes.

Our system is a **Recipe Orchestration Engine**, not a low-level PLC programmer. The firmware is a simple, robust command executor. The system_api contains the complex procedural logic. This architecture is our blueprint for building a flexible, reusable, and maintainable system.

---

## 2. System Architecture

We will implement a three-tier architecture that clearly delineates responsibilities. The System API will serve as the primary programmatic and user-facing interface.



1.  **Presentation Tier (Web UI)**
    -   A Single-Page Application (SPA) running in a standard web browser.
    -   Responsible for all user interaction: model configuration, recipe authoring, and the real-time Operator HMI.
    -   Communicates with the system_api via a REST API (for configuration) and WebSockets (for real-time data).
2.  **Application Tier (System API)**
    -   The "brain" of the system.
    -   Hosts the **Batch Executive**, the engine that interprets and executes recipes.
    -   Provides the REST API for CRUD operations on models and recipes.
    -   Manages the WebSocket-based publish-subscribe (Pub/Sub) hub for real-time communication.
    -   Leverages **NATS** for all real-time publish-subscribe messaging.
    -   Handles user authentication and Role-Based Access Control (RBAC).

3.  **Control Tier (Microcontroller/Firmware)**
    -   A **Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)**. Its sole responsibility is to execute primitive commands and report sensor data/state changes.
    -   It contains **no recipe-specific logic**.
    -   It communicates with the server via a lightweight, real-time protocol (e.g., MQTT or custom protocol over a TCP socket).
    -   It communicates with the system_api via **NATS**.
    -   It **must** implement a watchdog timer to fail-safe if server communication is lost.

---

## 3. Data Models & API Contracts

This section defines the critical data structures and communication protocols that enable parallel development across the team.

### 3.1. Physical Model Data Structure

This is how we represent the physical equipment hierarchy. It will be stored in the database and manipulated via the REST API.

```json
{
  "id": "pm_12345",
  "name": "Bioreactor_Cell_01",
  "type": "ProcessCell",
  "children": [
    {
      "id": "unit_67890",
      "name": "BR-101",
      "type": "Unit",
      "children": [
        {
          "id": "em_abcde",
          "name": "TemperatureControlSystem",
          "type": "EquipmentModule",
          "children": [
            {
              "id": "cm_fghij",
              "name": "HeaterValve",
              "type": "ControlModule",
              "binding": "mcu.digital_out.0"
            },
            {
              "id": "cm_klmno",
              "name": "TemperatureSensor",
              "type": "ControlModule",
              "binding": "mcu.analog_in.1"
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

### 3.2. Recipe Model Data Structure (PFC)

This is the output of our graphical Recipe Editor. It represents the procedural logic that the Batch Executive will interpret.

```json
{
  "id": "recipe_pqrst",
  "name": "Standard Fermentation",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "startStep": "step_1",
  "steps": [
    {
      "id": "step_1",
      "phase": "HEAT",
      "parameters": { "TargetTemp": 85.0 },
      "transitionTo": "step_2",
      "transitionCondition": {
        "logic": "AND",
        "conditions": [
          { "tag": "BR101.TEMP.PV", "op": ">=", "value": 84.5 },
          { "tag": "HEAT.State", "op": "==", "value": "COMPLETE" }
        ]
      }
    },
    {
      "id": "step_2",
      "phase": "AGITATE",
      "parameters": { "Speed": 200 },
      "transitionTo": "step_3",
      "transitionCondition": {
        "logic": "AND",
        "conditions": [ { "type": "delay", "value": "30m" } ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### 3.3. API Contracts

#### REST API (Configuration - Stateless)

| Resource         | Endpoint                      | Method        | Description                               |
| ---------------- | ----------------------------- | ------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| Physical Model   | `/api/physical-models`        | GET, POST     | List or create physical asset hierarchies.|
| Recipes          | `/api/recipes`                | GET, POST     | List or create master recipe templates.   |
| Batches          | `/api/batches`                | POST          | Create & start a batch from a recipe.     |
| Batch Control    | `/api/batches/{id}/command`   | PUT           | Send commands (HOLD, ABORT) to a batch.   |

#### NATS Publish-Subscribe Topics (Real-Time - Stateful)

| Topic Name         | Publisher  | Subscriber | Purpose                                       |
| ------------------ | ---------- | ---------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| `pvs/update`       | Firmware   | Server, UI | Real-time sensor Process Variable (PV) updates. |
\ No newline at end of file

---

## 4. Key Component Implementation

### 4.1. Firmware: The Primitive Executor (Communicates via Edge Device Controller)

The firmware's role is simple but critical. It is a **Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)**.
-   It listens for commands on the `command/execute` topic.
-   It listens for commands on the **NATS** `command/execute` topic.
-   It maintains the state for each phase (IDLE, RUNNING, HOLDING, etc.).
-   It translates logical commands into physical I/O operations.
-   It publishes sensor data on `pvs/update` and phase state changes on `phase/state`.
-   It publishes sensor data on the **NATS** `pvs/update` topic and phase state changes on the `phase/state` topic.
-   **It does NOT contain any recipe logic or transition conditions.**

**Example Primitive Functions to Implement:**
-   `HEAT(target_temp)`
-   `AGITATE(speed)`
-   `ADD_LIQUID(pump_id, volume)`
-   `AWAIT_CONDITION(sensor, operator, value, timeout)`
-   `SET_DIGITAL_OUT(channel, state)`

### 4.2. System API: The Batch Executive

This is the core execution engine on the backend. Its primary loop for a running batch is:
1.  Identify the current active step(s) in the recipe's PFC.
2.  Continuously monitor incoming real-time data (`pvs/update`, `phase/state`).
3.  Evaluate the transition condition(s) for the active step(s).
4.  When a transition condition evaluates to `true`:
    -   Log the transition in the Electronic Batch Record (EBR).
    -   Identify the next step(s).
    -   Send the corresponding command(s) for the new phase(s) to the firmware via the `command/execute` topic.
    -   Send the corresponding command(s) for the new phase(s) to the firmware via the **NATS** `command/execute` topic.
5.  Repeat from step 1.

### 4.3. Frontend: The Graphical Recipe Editor

This is the most complex UI component. It must be intuitive for non-programmers.
-   **Canvas:** Use a dedicated diagramming library (**JointJS+, React Flow, GoJS**) to build a graphical PFC/SFC editor.
-   **Elements:** The editor toolbox must provide standard SFC elements: Step, Transition, Parallel Branch, and Selection Branch.
-   **No-Code Transition Builder:** This is a critical requirement. When a user selects a transition, a modal or side panel must open with a rule builder. The user will construct boolean logic using dropdown menus (for tags and operators) and input fields, not by writing code.

---

## 5. Core User & System Flows

### 5.1. Design-Time Flow: Creating a Recipe

1.  **Engineer** uses the **Physical Model Editor** (tree view) to define the bioreactor's Units, EMs, and CMs, binding them to firmware tags. This is saved via the REST API.
2.  **Engineer** defines reusable **Equipment Phases** (e.g., HEAT) and associates them with their parent Equipment Module. They define the phase parameters (e.g., `TargetTemp`).
3.  **Scientist** opens the **Graphical Recipe Editor**.
4.  They drag-and-drop steps and transitions onto the canvas to build the PFC.
5.  For each step, they select a pre-defined Phase (e.g., HEAT) and provide a value for its parameters (e.g., `85.0`).
6.  For each transition, they use the **No-Code Transition Builder** to define the gating logic.
7.  The completed recipe JSON is saved to the server via the REST API.
    The completed recipe JSON is saved to the server via the REST API.

### 5.2. Run-Time Flow: Executing a Batch
1.  **Operator** selects a master recipe on the HMI and clicks "Start Batch". This sends a POST request to `/api/batches`.
2.  The **System API** creates a control recipe instance (a batch) and starts the **Batch Executive**.
3.  The **Batch Executive** reads the first step of the recipe (e.g., HEAT phase).
4.  It sends a command to the `command/execute` topic: `{ "cmd": "HEAT", "params": {"target_temp": 85.0} }`.
5.  The **Firmware** receives the command, transitions the HEAT phase to `RUNNING`, and begins activating the heater. It publishes the new state on the `phase/state` topic.
4.  It sends a command to the **NATS** `command/execute` topic: `{ "cmd": "HEAT", "params": {"target_temp": 85.0} }`.
5.  The **Firmware** receives the command via NATS, transitions the HEAT phase to `RUNNING`, and begins activating the heater. It publishes the new state on the **NATS** `phase/state` topic.
6.  The **System API** receives the state update and relays it to the **HMI**, which highlights the step as active.
7.  The **Firmware** continuously publishes temperature updates on the **NATS** `pvs/update` topic. The HMI displays this data in real-time.
8.  The **Batch Executive** continuously evaluates the transition condition (`BR101.TEMP.PV >= 84.5`).
9.  Once the temperature is reached, the firmware reports the phase `COMPLETE` on `phase/state`.
9.  Once the temperature is reached, the firmware reports the phase `COMPLETE` on the **NATS** `phase/state` topic.
10. The **Batch Executive** sees the `COMPLETE` state, evaluates the transition as `true`, and proceeds to the next step in the recipe. This cycle repeats until the recipe ends.


---

## 6. Non-Functional Requirements & Technology

-   **Security**: **Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) is mandatory**. At minimum: Administrator, Engineer, Operator. All communication must be encrypted (HTTPS/WSS/TLS).
-   **Reliability**: **Firmware watchdog is non-negotiable**. If communication is lost, the firmware must transition hardware to a pre-defined safe state.
-   **Data Integrity**: The system **must** generate an immutable **Electronic Batch Record (EBR)** for every batch, logging all operator commands, state changes, alarms, and periodic PV snapshots.
-   **Technology Stack Recommendation**:
    -   **Frontend:** React or Vue with a dedicated diagramming library.
    -   **Backend:** Node.js (with TypeScript) or Python (with FastAPI) for strong async/WebSocket support.
    -   **Database:** A dual-database approach is recommended.
        -   **Relational (PostgreSQL):** For structured configuration data (models, recipes, users).
        -   **Time-Series (TimescaleDB, InfluxDB):** For high-volume process data for the EBR and trend charts.
    -   **Real-time Messaging:** NATS (for all Pub/Sub communication).

Commit message:

docs: Document API-to-API provisioning, identity, and NATS configuration

DESIGN.md, after:

# Bioreactor Control System: Technical Design

**Version:** 1.0  
**Status:** DRAFT  
**Audience:** Engineering Team (Frontend, Backend, Firmware)

## 1. Guiding Principles & Core Philosophy

This document outlines the technical design for a web-based, ISA-88 compliant PLC interface. Our success hinges on one core principle: the strict **separation of the procedural recipe from the equipment control logic**.

-   **The Recipe (The "What")**: Defines the process strategy. This logic lives on the server and is created by users in our web UI. It contains **no** hardware-specific code.
-   **Equipment Control (The "How")**: The basic actions the hardware can perform (e.g., heat, agitate). This logic is implemented once in the firmware and is reused across all recipes.

Our system is a **Recipe Orchestration Engine**, not a low-level PLC programmer. The firmware is a simple, robust command executor. The system_api contains the complex procedural logic. This architecture is our blueprint for building a flexible, reusable, and maintainable system.

---

## 2. System Architecture

We will implement a three-tier architecture that clearly delineates responsibilities. The System API will serve as the primary programmatic and user-facing interface.



1.  **Presentation Tier (Web UI)**
    -   A Single-Page Application (SPA) running in a standard web browser.
    -   Responsible for all user interaction: model configuration, recipe authoring, and the real-time Operator HMI.
    -   Communicates with the system_api via a REST API (for configuration) and WebSockets (for real-time data).
2.  **Application Tier (System API)**
    -   The "brain" of the system.
    -   Hosts the **Batch Executive**, the engine that interprets and executes recipes.
    -   Provides the REST API for CRUD operations on models and recipes.
    -   Manages the WebSocket-based publish-subscribe (Pub/Sub) hub for real-time communication.
    -   Leverages **NATS** for all real-time publish-subscribe messaging, configured by the `edge_device_controller` using NATS `nkeys` or `tokens`.
    -   Handles user authentication and Role-Based Access Control (RBAC).
    -   Manages API-to-API provisioning (central host role).
    -   Acts as a central repository for registered edge System API metadata (requires admin approval for authorization).

3.  **Control Tier (Microcontroller/Firmware)**
    -   A **Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)**. Its sole responsibility is to execute primitive commands and report sensor data/state changes.
    -   It contains **no recipe-specific logic**.                                     
    -   It communicates with the server via a lightweight, real-time protocol (e.g., MQTT or custom protocol over a TCP socket).
    -   It communicates with the system_api via **NATS**.
    -   It **must** implement a watchdog timer to fail-safe if server communication is lost.

---

## 3. Data Models & API Contracts

This section defines the critical data structures and communication protocols that enable parallel development across the team.

### 3.1. Physical Model Data Structure

This is how we represent the physical equipment hierarchy. It will be stored in the database and manipulated via the REST API.

```json
{
  "id": "pm_12345",
  "name": "Bioreactor_Cell_01",
  "type": "ProcessCell",
  "children": [
    {
      "id": "unit_67890",
      "name": "BR-101",
      "type": "Unit",
      "children": [
        {
          "id": "em_abcde",
          "name": "TemperatureControlSystem",
          "type": "EquipmentModule",
          "children": [
            {
              "id": "cm_fghij",
              "name": "HeaterValve",
              "type": "ControlModule",
              "binding": "mcu.digital_out.0"
            },
            {
              "id": "cm_klmno",
              "name": "TemperatureSensor",
              "type": "ControlModule",
              "binding": "mcu.analog_in.1"
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

### 3.2. Recipe Model Data Structure (PFC)

This is the output of our graphical Recipe Editor. It represents the procedural logic that the Batch Executive will interpret.

```json
{
  "id": "recipe_pqrst",
  "name": "Standard Fermentation",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "startStep": "step_1",
  "steps": [
    {
      "id": "step_1",
      "phase": "HEAT",
      "parameters": { "TargetTemp": 85.0 },
      "transitionTo": "step_2",
      "transitionCondition": {
        "logic": "AND",
        "conditions": [
          { "tag": "BR101.TEMP.PV", "op": ">=", "value": 84.5 },
          { "tag": "HEAT.State", "op": "==", "value": "COMPLETE" }
        ]
      }
    },
    {
      "id": "step_2",
      "phase": "AGITATE",
      "parameters": { "Speed": 200 },
      "transitionTo": "step_3",
      "transitionCondition": {
        "logic": "AND",
        "conditions": [ { "type": "delay", "value": "30m" } ]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

### 3.3. API Contracts

#### REST API (Configuration - Stateless)

| Resource         | Endpoint                      | Method        | Description                               |
| ---------------- | ----------------------------- | ------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| Physical Model   | `/api/physical-models`        | GET, POST     | List or create physical asset hierarchies.|
| Recipes          | `/api/recipes`                | GET, POST     | List or create master recipe templates.   |\ No newline at end of file
| API Provisioning | `/api/provision/request`      | POST          | Request authorization for a new edge System API instance. |
| Batches          | `/api/batches`                | POST          | Create & start a batch from a recipe.     |
| Batch Control    | `/api/batches/{id}/command`   | PUT           | Send commands (HOLD, ABORT) to a batch.   |

#### NATS Publish-Subscribe Topics (Real-Time - Stateful)

| Topic Name         | Publisher  | Subscriber | Purpose                                       |
| ------------------ | ---------- | ---------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| `pvs/update`       | Firmware   | Server, UI | Real-time sensor Process Variable (PV) updates. |
\ No newline at end of file

---

## 4. Key Component Implementation

### 4.1. Firmware: The Primitive Executor (Communicates via Edge Device Controller)

The firmware's role is simple but critical. It is a **Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)**.
-   It listens for commands on the `command/execute` topic.
-   It listens for commands on the **NATS** `command/execute` topic.
-   It maintains the state for each phase (IDLE, RUNNING, HOLDING, etc.).
-   It translates logical commands into physical I/O operations.
-   It publishes sensor data on `pvs/update` and phase state changes on `phase/state`.
-   It publishes sensor data on the **NATS** `pvs/update` topic and phase state changes on the `phase/state` topic.
-   **It does NOT contain any recipe logic or transition conditions.**

**Example Primitive Functions to Implement:**
-   `HEAT(target_temp)`
-   `AGITATE(speed)`
-   `ADD_LIQUID(pump_id, volume)`
-   `AWAIT_CONDITION(sensor, operator, value, timeout)`
-   `SET_DIGITAL_OUT(channel, state)`

### 4.2. System API: The Batch Executive

This is the core execution engine on the backend. Its primary loop for a running batch is:
1.  Identify the current active step(s) in the recipe's PFC.
2.  Continuously monitor incoming real-time data (`pvs/update`, `phase/state`).
3.  Evaluate the transition condition(s) for the active step(s).
4.  When a transition condition evaluates to `true`:
    -   Log the transition in the Electronic Batch Record (EBR).
    -   Identify the next step(s).
    -   Send the corresponding command(s) for the new phase(s) to the firmware via the `command/execute` topic.
    -   Send the corresponding command(s) for the new phase(s) to the firmware via the **NATS** `command/execute` topic.
5.  Repeat from step 1.

### 4.3. Frontend: The Graphical Recipe Editor

This is the most complex UI component. It must be intuitive for non-programmers.
-   **Canvas:** Use a dedicated diagramming library (**JointJS+, React Flow, GoJS**) to build a graphical PFC/SFC editor.
-   **Elements:** The editor toolbox must provide standard SFC elements: Step, Transition, Parallel Branch, and Selection Branch.
-   **No-Code Transition Builder:** This is a critical requirement. When a user selects a transition, a modal or side panel must open with a rule builder. The user will construct boolean logic using dropdown menus (for tags and operators) and input fields, not by writing code.

---

## 5. Core User & System Flows

### 5.1. Design-Time Flow: Creating a Recipe

1.  **Engineer** uses the **Physical Model Editor** (tree view) to define the bioreactor's Units, EMs, and CMs, binding them to firmware tags. This is saved via the REST API.
2.  **Engineer** defines reusable **Equipment Phases** (e.g., HEAT) and associates them with their parent Equipment Module. They define the phase parameters (e.g., `TargetTemp`).
3.  **Scientist** opens the **Graphical Recipe Editor**.
4.  They drag-and-drop steps and transitions onto the canvas to build the PFC.
5.  For each step, they select a pre-defined Phase (e.g., HEAT) and provide a value for its parameters (e.g., `85.0`).
6.  For each transition, they use the **No-Code Transition Builder** to define the gating logic.
7.  The completed recipe JSON is saved to the server via the REST API.
    The completed recipe JSON is saved to the server via the REST API.

### 5.2. Run-Time Flow: Executing a Batch
1.  **Operator** selects a master recipe on the HMI and clicks "Start Batch". This sends a POST request to `/api/batches`.
2.  The **System API** creates a control recipe instance (a batch) and starts the **Batch Executive**.
3.  The **Batch Executive** reads the first step of the recipe (e.g., HEAT phase).
4.  It sends a command to the `command/execute` topic: `{ "cmd": "HEAT", "params": {"target_temp": 85.0} }`.
5.  The **Firmware** receives the command, transitions the HEAT phase to `RUNNING`, and begins activating the heater. It publishes the new state on the `phase/state` topic.
4.  It sends a command to the **NATS** `command/execute` topic: `{ "cmd": "HEAT", "params": {"target_temp": 85.0} }`.
5.  The **Firmware** receives the command via NATS, transitions the HEAT phase to `RUNNING`, and begins activating the heater. It publishes the new state on the **NATS** `phase/state` topic.
6.  The **System API** receives the state update and relays it to the **HMI**, which highlights the step as active.
7.  The **Firmware** continuously publishes temperature updates on the **NATS** `pvs/update` topic. The HMI displays this data in real-time.
8.  The **Batch Executive** continuously evaluates the transition condition (`BR101.TEMP.PV >= 84.5`).
9.  Once the temperature is reached, the firmware reports the phase `COMPLETE` on `phase/state`.
9.  Once the temperature is reached, the firmware reports the phase `COMPLETE` on the **NATS** `phase/state` topic.
10. The **Batch Executive** sees the `COMPLETE` state, evaluates the transition as `true`, and proceeds to the next step in the recipe. This cycle repeats until the recipe ends.



| Topic Name         | Publisher  | Subscriber | Purpose                                       |
| ------------------ | ---------- | ---------- | --------------------------------------------- |
\ No newline at end of file

@@ -194,9 +207,17 @@
---

## 6. Non-Functional Requirements & Technology
-   **Security**: **Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) is mandatory**. At minimum: Administrator, Engineer, Operator. All communication must be encrypted (HTTPS/WSS/TLS).
-   **Security**: **Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) is mandatory**. At minimum: Administrator, Engineer, Operator. All communication must be encrypted (HTTPS/WSS/TLS).
    -   **API Identity & Provisioning**: Each `system_api` instance will have a persistent, locally generated UUID and a corresponding private key. These identifiers and keys are *never* stored in version control; if a valid UUID/private key pair is not found in local storage, a new one will be generated. The last byte of the UUID *may* be used as a 7-bit SMBus address for local device interactions.
    -   A public-facing API endpoint (`/api/provision/request`) allows new `system_api` instances (e.g., edge deployments) to request registration with a central `system_api`. All such provisioning requests are stored on the central host, and authorization of new API accounts requires explicit administrator approval. Once authorized, these `system_api` instances will be visible on the central host's interface, alongside any locally connected `edge_device_controller` clients.
-   **Reliability**: **Firmware watchdog is non-negotiable**. If communication is lost, the firmware must transition hardware to a pre-defined safe state.
-   **Data Integrity**: The system **must** generate an immutable **Electronic Batch Record (EBR)** for every batch, logging all operator commands, state changes, alarms, and periodic PV snapshots.
-   **Technology Stack Recommendation**:
    -   **Frontend:** React or Vue with a dedicated diagramming library.
    -   **Backend:** Node.js (with TypeScript) or Python (with FastAPI) for strong async/WebSocket support.
    -   **Database:** A dual-database approach is recommended.
        -   **Relational (PostgreSQL):** For structured configuration data (models, recipes, users).
        -   **Time-Series (TimescaleDB, InfluxDB):** For high-volume process data for the EBR and trend charts.
    -   **Real-time Messaging:** NATS (for all Pub/Sub communication).
