README.md, before:

# Placeholder App 🐎

This is a placeholder repository for a generic application. It serves as a starting point for new projects.

## Badges

[![Docker](https://github.com/jvishnefske/equusExpress/actions/workflows/docker-publish.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/jvishnefske/equusExpress/actions/workflows/docker-publish.yml)
[![Docker](https://github.com/jvishnefske/equusExpress/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/jvishnefske/equusExpress/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![SonarCloud Quality Gate](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/component_measures?id=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=coverage)
[![SonarCloud Quality Gate](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=security_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/component_measures?metric=Security&id=jvishnefske_equusExpress)
[![SonarCloud Quality Gate](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=ncloc)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=jvishnefske_equusExpress)
[![SonarCloud Quality Gate](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=vulnerabilities)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=jvishnefske_equusExpress)


## Getting Started

# Certificate Provisioning System Setup Guide

This guide walks you through setting up a complete certificate provisioning system for Raspberry Pi devices with FastAPI.

## Architecture Overview

1.  **API Server** (HTTP) - Handles public key registration, telemetry, and device management. Designed to run behind a reverse proxy (e.g., Traefik) that handles HTTPS/SSL.
2.  **Device Client** - Automatically generates an RSA public/private key pair on first run and registers its public key with the server. Sends telemetry and status updates.
3.  **Web Dashboard** - A simple web interface provided by the server to view connected devices and their telemetry.

## Prerequisites

### Server Requirements
-   Python 3.8+
-   SQLite3
-   Network access for clients (typically via a proxy)

### Client Requirements
-   Python 3.8+
-   `cryptography` library for key generation
-   Network connectivity to the server (or proxy)

## Getting Started

### 1. Install Dependencies

Install the required Python packages using `uv`:

```bash
uv pip install -r requirements.txt # Ensure your requirements.txt is up-to-date
uv pip install cryptography pytest httpx # For client keys and testing
```

### 2. Run the Server

The server runs on HTTP (default port 8000) and is designed to be placed behind an SSL-terminating proxy like Traefik.

```bash
uv run python3 -m equus_express.server
```

Once running, you can access the server's health check at `http://localhost:8000/health`.

### 3. Run the Client

The client will generate a new RSA key pair in `~/.equus_express/keys/` on its first run and register its public key with the server.

```bash
uv run python3 -m equus_express.client http://localhost:8000 [your_device_id]
```
Replace `http://localhost:8000` with the actual URL of your server (or proxy). `[your_device_id]` is optional; if not provided, it defaults to your hostname.

### 4. View the Dashboard

Open your web browser to access the device dashboard:

```
http://localhost:8000/dashboard
```

This dashboard will display registered devices and their latest telemetry data.

Commit message:

docs: Update README for pyproject.toml dependency management

README.md, after:

# Placeholder App 🐎

This is a placeholder repository for a generic application. It serves as a starting point for new projects.

## Badges

[![Docker](https://github.com/jvishnefske/equusExpress/actions/workflows/docker-publish.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/jvishnefske/equusExpress/actions/workflows/docker-publish.yml)
[![Docker](https://github.com/jvishnefske/equusExpress/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/jvishnefske/equusExpress/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![SonarCloud Quality Gate](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/component_measures?id=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=coverage)
[![SonarCloud Quality Gate](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=security_rating)](https://sonarcloud.io/component_measures?metric=Security&id=jvishnefske_equusExpress)
[![SonarCloud Quality Gate](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=ncloc)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=jvishnefske_equusExpress)
[![SonarCloud Quality Gate](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=jvishnefske_equusExpress&metric=vulnerabilities)](https://sonarcloud.io/dashboard?id=jvishnefske_equusExpress)


## Getting Started

# Certificate Provisioning System Setup Guide

This guide walks you through setting up a complete certificate provisioning system for Raspberry Pi devices with FastAPI.

## Architecture Overview

1.  **API Server** (HTTP) - Handles public key registration, telemetry, and device management. Designed to run behind a reverse proxy (e.g., Traefik) that handles HTTPS/SSL.
2.  **Device Client** - Automatically generates an RSA public/private key pair on first run and registers its public key with the server. Sends telemetry and status updates.
3.  **Web Dashboard** - A simple web interface provided by the server to view connected devices and their telemetry.

## Prerequisites

### Server Requirements
-   Python 3.8+
-   SQLite3
-   Network access for clients (typically via a proxy)

### Client Requirements
-   Python 3.8+
-   `cryptography` library for key generation
-   Network connectivity to the server (or proxy)

## Getting Started

### 1. Install Dependencies

Install the required Python packages using `uv`:

```bash
uv pip install .[dev] # Install main and development dependencies from pyproject.toml
```

### 2. Run the Server

The server runs on HTTP (default port 8000) and is designed to be placed behind an SSL-terminating proxy like Traefik.

```bash
uv run python3 -m equus_express.server
```

Once running, you can access the server's health check at `http://localhost:8000/health`.

### 3. Run the Client

The client will generate a new RSA key pair in `~/.equus_express/keys/` on its first run and register its public key with the server.

```bash
uv run python3 -m equus_express.client http://localhost:8000 [your_device_id]
```
Replace `http://localhost:8000` with the actual URL of your server (or proxy). `[your_device_id]` is optional; if not provided, it defaults to your hostname.

### 4. View the Dashboard

Open your web browser to access the device dashboard:

```
http://localhost:8000/dashboard
```

This dashboard will display registered devices and their latest telemetry data.
